Unlock Existential Types for All Protocols (#1176)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-unlock-existential-types-for-all-protocols.md

# Unlock Existentials for All Protocols

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-unlock-existential-types-for-all-protocols.md)
* Authors: [Anthony Latsis](https://github.com/AnthonyLatsis), [Filip Sakel](https://github.com/filip-sakel), [Suyash Srijan](https://github.com/theblixguy)
* Review Manager: TBD

> * Status: **Awaiting implementation**

Reviewer: Nit: I think it should be “Awaiting Review” since we have an implementation.

Generics are most often the best mechanism for type-level abstraction, which relies on the compiler knowing type information during compilation. However, type information is not always a gurantee, which is why the value-level abstraction of existential types is extremely useful in some cases.

One such case is heterogenous collections, which require value-level abstraction to store their elements of various types:

```swift
protocol Identifiable {
    associatedtype ID: Hashable 
    
    var id: ID { get }

> }

Reviewer: It might be good to expand here with a code sample that shows creating an array of Identifable leads to an error, which is why we need to create a type eraser wrapper.

Author: I changed it to this:

```swift
let naiveIdentifiables: [Identifiable] ❌
// The compiler doesn't currently allow that.
// So, we work around that by creating a
// custom existential type: `AnyIdentifiable`.
```

Let me know if you think it's too detailed or whether you think we should add a more detailed message. I chose to not expand too much on the actual error message, since SE readers are probably familiar with that. Additionally, since I've added this message, I've also added the reason why we need he existential - as you proposed.

Reviewer: Looks good. One nit though - we should use `'` instead of `` ` `` or just drop it entirely since backtracks don't work in comments.

struct AnyIdentifiable { 
    typealias ID = AnyHashable
    
    var id: ID { ... }
}

> let myIdentifiables: [AnyIdentifiable]

Reviewer: I think we also need to talk about known associated types as well in this section.

Author: Right! Especially if we consider that this is the problem the original proposal addressed.

Author: Okey, I've added it!

---

Morover, the availability of an existential types for a given protocol is sometimes quite unintuitive. That is, today, a protocol qualifies for an existential type provided that it lacks any `Self` or associated type requirements; however, the associated types of a protocol can be fixed via the same-type constraint. As a result, [post](https://forums.swift.org/t/making-a-protocols-associated-type-concrete-via-inheritance/6557) after [post](https://forums.swift.org/t/constrained-associated-type-on-protocol/38770) has been created asking for this restriction's removal:

 ```swift
 protocol User: Identifiable
   where ID == UUID {
   
   var username: Strng { get }
 }
   
 let myUsers: [User] ❌
 // This is forbidden today
 // for no apparent reason.
 ```

All in all, supporting existential types for all protocols is useful for many situations that involve dynamicity. Moreover, there are many questions by language users asking about this behavior. Taking everything into consideration, we are confident that addressing this abnormality in the language will build a stronger foundation for [future additions](https://forums.swift.org/t/improving-the-ui-of-generics/22814) .

### Proposed Solution

The constraint prohibiting the use of some protocols as types will be lifted. As a result, boilerplate code in many projects - especially libraries and frameworks - will be significantly reduced.

### Detailed Design 

The compiler will no longer differentiate between protocols that don’t have `Self` or associated type requirements and those that do. However, some restrictions will apply to the use of requirements referencing associated types as seen in the below examples.

#### Examples:

>  1. Protocol with `Self` and Associated Type Requirements 

Reviewer: Perhaps we can give it a header style (##### or bold - I’m not sure if they’re equivalent!) instead of using a numbered list which adds extra whitepace to the title

# Unlock Existentials for All Protocols

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-unlock-existential-types-for-all-protocols.md)
* Authors: [Anthony Latsis](https://github.com/AnthonyLatsis), [Filip Sakel](https://github.com/filip-sakel), [Suyash Srijan](https://github.com/theblixguy)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Awaiting implementation**

> 

Reviewer 2: Could you add links to the implementation PR and pitch as per the proposal template?

### Introduction

Swift currently offers the ability for protocols that meet certain criteria to be used as types. Trying to use an unsupported protocol as a type yields the error `[the protocol] can only be used as a generic constraint because it has 'Self' or associated type requirements`. This proposal aims to relax this artificial constraint imposed on such protocols.

### Motivation

> Currently, any protocol that has `Self` or associated type requirements is not allowed to be used as a type. Initially, this restriction reflected technical limitations (as Joe states [here](https://forums.swift.org/t/lifting-the-self-or-associated-type-constraint-on-existentials/18025)); however, such limitations have now been alleviated. As a result, users are left unable to utilize a powerful feature for certain protocols. That’s evident in a plethora of projects. For instance, the Standard Library has existential types such as [`AnyHashable`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/anyhashable) and [`AnyCollection`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/anycollection) and SwiftUI has [`AnyView`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/anyview). 

Reviewer 2: Non-covariant would be best, since invariant uses such as `func foo() -> G<Self>` are also subject to the restriction.

All in all, supporting existential types for all protocols is useful for many situations that involve dynamicity. Moreover, there are many questions by language users asking about this behavior. Taking everything into consideration, we are confident that addressing this abnormality in the language will build a stronger foundation for [future additions](https://forums.swift.org/t/improving-the-ui-of-generics/22814) .

### Proposed Solution

We propose that the constraint prohibiting the use of some protocols as types be lifted. As a result, boilerplate code in many projects - especially libraries and frameworks - will be significantly reduced.

### Detailed Design 

Should this proposal be accepted, the compiler would no longer differentiate between protocols that don’t have `Self` or associated type requirements and those that do. However, some restrictions would apply to the use of requirements referencing associated types as seen in the below examples.

#### Examples:

1. Regular Protocol

```swift
protocol Foo {
    var bar: Int { get }
}

> let foo: Foo = ... ✅

Author: I agree that we should clarify that these examples already work. In my opinion we should have a reference point so that it's clear what is being added and what already works. So, I think, we could that; let me know what you think of the following:

-------------------------------
### Detailed Design

[ ... ] below examples.

#### Already Valid 

We provide the following already valid code so as to clearly distinguish the proposed design from the existing one.

```swift
// Example ...
```

#### Now Valid

```swift
// Examples ...
```

-------------------------------

> let foo: Foo = ... ✅

Reviewer 2: I agree with Suyash that we could focus a bit more on what we propose: in general, SE proposals are not considered beginner material and we expect the reader to have read the language guide when in comes to existing well-known features.

let bar: Int = foo.bar ✅

extension Foo {
    var baz: Self { 
        self
    }

    var opaqueSelf: some Foo {
        self
    }
}

let baz: some Foo =

>     foo.baz ✅

Author: Okey, I've changed it. Just note that longer lines will be kept multiline so as to be readable on smaller screens.

>     foo.baz ✅

Reviewer 2: > Just note that longer lines will be kept multiline so as to be readable on smaller screens.
 
Let us stick to the historical 80-column convention then.

>     foo.baz ✅

Author: Let me know if there is any other code that needs to be reduced in the number of lines.

    
let opaqueSelf: some Foo =
    foo.opaqueSelf ✅
```

 2. Protocol with `Self` and Associated Type Requirements 

```swift
protocol Foo {
    associatedtype Bar
    
    var bar: Bar { get }
}

> let foo: Foo = ... ✅ 

Reviewer: Let's provide code samples that actually compile and run, because there will be people copy-paste this and running it. Also, I think we should drop `Foo` and etc and use `P` and `Q` (add a number to make it unique within a given context if multiple samples are required) as that is easier to process IMO.

Also, what do you think about reducing indentation by using 2 spaces? For example:

```swift
protocol P {
  var value: Int { get }
}

// instead of

protocol P {
    var value: Int { get }
}
```

Reviewer: The conforming type for above should just be: 

```swift
struct S: Foo { 
  let bar: Int
}
```

which is very short so IMO it should not be confusing to the user. If you look at other proposals (like function builders or property wrappers), they all provide full code samples ti make it clearer what code compiles/doesn't compile and also makes it easy for readers to copy-paste and run it with a development toolchain/Xcode beta for example.

Reviewer: > As for the spacing, do you have any particular reason for 2-point spacing? The current examples don't really have a lot of nesting.

Just personal preference and that most proposals seems to use it.

let bar: Any = foo.bar ❌
// We don’t know what type 
// `Bar` is on the existential

> // type of `Foo`.

Reviewer: Let's put the comment above the code rather than below.

Reviewer: Ah okay. Sounds good to me. It might be good to adjust the formatting a bit i.e. in above sample you can fit the comment in two lines.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should be trying to find a justification for this example. There would be nothing wrong with erasing `Self.Bar` to `Any` were the compiler to handle these cases.

Reviewer 2: What I mean is that `let bar: Any = foo.bar` would *still be* an error, unless we get this to work now as well (probable, but not certain), not because we don't know what type `Bar` is, but because the compiler is simply lacking the necessary handling for these cases. 
> ```swift
> let id = identifiable.id
> // What would this be:
> // `Any` or `Hashable`?
> ```

`Hashable`; `Any` should be a last resort, when there are no upper bounds at all.

Author: I agree; I think that allowing access to requirements referencing associated types would be the right thing to do. I also agree that substituting associated types with the relevant existential instead of ‘Any’ would be better. Although, this would be a great feature to have, I don’t know if it’s going to substantially complicate the implementation. However, if you think this is achievable, I’d be happy to incorporate it into the proposal.

Reviewer: It would be nice to have this feature to complement the “fixed associatedtype” feature. I am not very familiar with associatedtype implementation, but I don’t think it will be difficult to support this. 

On the other hand, I think what we have now is “good enough” for a first step and also helps keep the proposal simple. There’s definitely more to do but remaining features can be added via future proposals.

Author: I think you're right, this should be a relatively small incremental change. I think the proposal is currently satisfactory in that it unlocks existential for all protocols. This is one limitation that will certainly be frustrating until tackled. However, other limitations will also exist, such as being unable to open existentials, not being able to constraint existentials  etc.

One such case is heterogenous collections, which require value-level abstraction to store their elements of various types:

```swift
protocol Identifiable {
  associatedtype ID: Hashable 
    
  var id: ID { get }
}

let naiveIdentifiables: [Identifiable] ❌
// The compiler doesn't currently allow that.
// So, we work around that by creating a
// custom existential type: 'AnyIdentifiable'.

struct AnyIdentifiable { 
  typealias ID = AnyHashable
    
  var id: ID { ... }
}

let myIdentifiables: [AnyIdentifiable] ✅
```

Furthermore, dynamic environments are also known to lack type information. Therefore value-level abstraction can be exploited in cases such as previewing an application, where the application's components are dynamically replaced, in the file system where a file representing an unknown type might be stored, and in server environments, where various types could be exchanged between different computers.

> Morover, the availability of an existential types for a given protocol is sometimes quite unintuitive. That is, today, a protocol qualifies for an existential type provided that it lacks any `Self` or associated type requirements; however, the associated types of a protocol can be fixed via the same-type constraint. As a result, [post](https://forums.swift.org/t/making-a-protocols-associated-type-concrete-via-inheritance/6557) after [post](https://forums.swift.org/t/constrained-associated-type-on-protocol/38770) has been created asking for this restriction's removal:

Reviewer: Typo: “existential types” -> “existential type”

Reviewer: Typo (?): “qualifies for an” -> “qualifies as an”

Reviewer: “Any non-covariant Self” instead of “lacks Self”

Author: > Typo (?): “qualifies for an” -> “qualifies as an”

I don't think it's a typo; it's akin to saying "is eligible for an existential type". I do that because I try to segregate the notion of a protocol and an existential type of a protocol throughout the proposal. Therefore, it's not the protocol that is also an existential type; but rather the existential is a separate type altogether.

```swift
protocol User: Identifiable
  where ID == UUID {
  
  var username: Strng { get }
}
  
let myUsers: [User] ❌
// This is forbidden today
// for no apparent reason.
```

All in all, supporting existential types for all protocols is useful for many situations that involve dynamicity. Not to mention that there are many questions by language users asking about this behavior. Taking everything into consideration, we are confident that addressing this abnormality in the language will build a stronger foundation for [future additions](https://forums.swift.org/t/improving-the-ui-of-generics/22814).

### Proposed Solution

The constraint prohibiting the use of some protocols as types will be lifted. Consequently, boilerplate code in many projects - especially libraries and frameworks - will be significantly reduced.

### Detailed Design 

The compiler will no longer differentiate between protocols that don’t have `Self` or associated type requirements and those that do. However, some restrictions will apply to the use of requirements referencing associated types as seen in the below examples.

#### Examples:

##### Protocol with `Self` and Associated Type Requirements 

```swift

> protocol Foo {

Reviewer: Would be nice if all examples used the same style (A, B, etc). The ones below do but this one does not for example

### Proposed Solution

The constraint prohibiting the use of some protocols as types will be lifted. Consequently, boilerplate code in many projects — especially libraries and frameworks — will be significantly reduced.

### Detailed Design 

The compiler will no longer differentiate between protocols that don’t have `Self` or associated type requirements and those that do. However, some restrictions will apply to the use of requirements referencing associated types as seen in the below examples.

#### Examples:

##### Protocol with `Self` and Associated Type Requirements 

```swift
protocol A {
  associatedtype A
    
  var a: A { get }
}

struct S : A { 
  let a: Int = 5
}

let myA: A = S() ✅ 

let a: Any = myA.a ❌
// We don’t know what associated type 
// 'A' is on the existential type of 'A'.

extension A {
  var opaqueA: some Any {
    a 
  }
  // Note that it references 
  // the associated type 'A'.
}

let opaqueA: some Any = myA.opaqueA ❌
// Opaque result type don't 
// type-erase; they just conceal
// the underlying value from the
// user. As a result, the above 
// is not allowed.

> ```

Reviewer 3: It might be worth that these rules are consistent with how `Self` types in protocol extension method signatures behave today—you can't use the extension method if the `Self` type appears in a position that isn't covariant.

Author: Thank you Joe, we'll keep that in mind when writing the revised proposal.

##### Protocol with Known Associated Types

```swift
protocol A {
  associatedtype A

  var a: A { get }
}

protocol RefinedA : A
  where A == Int {}

struct S : RefinedA { 
  let a: Int = 5
}

let myRefinedA: RefinedA = S() ✅

let intA: Int = myRefinedA.a ✅
// Here we know that the associated
// type 'A' of 'RefinedA' is 'Int'.
```

##### Protocol Composition 

```swift
protocol A {
  associatedtype A

  var a: A { get }
}

protocol RefinedA : A
  where A == Int {}

protocol B {
  associatedtype B

  var b: B { get }
}

struct S : RefinedA & B { 
  let a: Int = 5
  let b: Int = 5
}

let myRefinedAB: RefinedA & B = S() ✅

let a: Int = myRefinedAB.a ✅

let b: some Any = myRefinedAB.b ❌
// We don’t know what type 'B' is
// on the type-erased value 'myRefinedAB'.
```

> **Note on conflicting associated types**: Consider the following sample:

  ```swift
  ...

  protocol AFixedToInt : A 
    where A == Int {}

  protocol AFixedToBool : A 
    where A == Bool {}

  let composition: AFixedToInt & AFixedToBool ⚠️
  // The associated type 'A' has conflicting 
  // implementations as both 'Int' and 'Bool'
  // in this composition type. 

  ```

>   > The above composition type emits a warning, as providing a value bound to the associated type '`A`' is not possible. It was also disussed to outright emit an error in this case; however, due to source compatibility constraints, the fact that the two protocols' associated types '`A`' are formally distinct and potential for protocol member disambiguation in the future, warnings were chosen.

Reviewer 3: An analogy to `Never` might be good here—the type can still exist, even though there are no possible values of the type. Also, in this case, the associated types aren't really formally distinct because they come from the same base protocol. Another example where protocol composition introduces associated types with the same name but different origins might be:

```
protocol A1 { associatedtype A }
protocol A2 { associatedtype A }

protocol A1Int: A1 where A == Int {}
protocol A2Bool: A2 where A == Bool {}

let compo: A1Int & A2Bool
```

Author: Sorry for taking so long to reply. You're right, I agree that `Never` would really help explain this behavior. Also, we'll correct the example in the new proposal, thank you!

```swift
protocol Animal: Identifiable where ID == String {}
extension Animal {
  var name: String { id }
}
```

The current semantic inconsistency also discourages authors from refining their existing protocols with other, useful ones in fear of losing existential qualification.

### Library Evolution

Removing the type-level restriction would mean that adding defaulted requirements to a protocol is always both a binary- and source-compatible change, since it could no longer interfere with existing uses of the protocol.

> ### Type-erasing Wrappers

Reviewer: Should the `W` in `Wrappers` be capitalized?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I suppose we should capitalize the `e` in `erasing`.

```swift
protocol Copyable {
  func copy() -> Self
}

func test(_ c: Copyable) {
  let x = c.copy() // OK, x is of type 'Copyable'
}
```

Because they tend to outnumber direct uses of `Self` in protocol contexts, and for the sake of consistency, we believe that extending covariant type erasure to associated types is a reasonable undertaking in light of the primary focus:

```swift
func test(_ collection: RandomAccessCollection) {
  // func dropLast(_ k: Int = 1) -> SubSequence
  let x = collection.dropLast() // OK, x is of type 'RandomAccessCollection'
}
```
___

This way, a protocol or protocol extension member (method/property/subscript/initializer) may be used on an existential value iff the following criteria hold:
* The type of the invoked member (accessor — for storage declarations), as viewed in context of the *base type*, must **not** contain references to `Self` or `Self`-rooted associated types in [non-covariant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Covariance_and_contravariance_(computer_science)) position.

> > The "`isAvailableOnExistential`" routine will consider the following types covariant:

Reviewer: Could we replace the first bit with something like `The compiler will consider` instead of `The isAvailableOnExistential routine will consider`? Given we're talking about implementation details here and the name of the routine can always change in the future, so it would be better to be more general here.

Reviewer 2: The name was meant to refer to some piece of code and its purpose, hence the quotes. I chose to be specific here because the constraint system (a different compiler component) and its covariant coercions are a superset of this list. How about we switch to indefinite passive and say "the following types will be considered covariant"?

Reviewer: That sounds good to me!

  }
}

let collection: RangeReplaceableCollection = [1, 2, 3]
// error: member 'append' cannot be used on value of protocol type 'RangeReplaceableCollection'
// because it references associated type 'Element' in contravariant position; use a conformance
// constraint instead.
collection.append(4)
```

In an ideal world, one could imagine the compiler to accompany the error with a note pointing to the specific type reference that is preventing the member from being used. We are inclined toward leaving this out of scope for several reasons:
* Retrieval of the *relevant* source location information both logically and mechanically poses an earnest challenge with the current workings of various compiler components and the potential involvement of generic constraints.
* There is no certainty in whether a concept of these high-precision notes can outplay an educational note in the general case, or is worth indefinitely dragging out a resolution to this particular proposal.

To showcase just one embodiment of the difficulties involved, consider this relatively simple code:
```swift
struct G<T> {}

protocol P {
  associatedtype A
  associatedtype B
  
  func method() -> B
}

> protocol Q: P where B == G<A> {}

Reviewer: Very minor nit but it's missing a newline after the closing `}`

Though, if we *were* going to introduce a new syntax for existentials, we think it'd be much less confusing if we took the potentially source-breaking path and did so uniformly, deprecating the existing syntax after a late-enough language version, than to have yet another attribute and two syntaxes where one only works some of the time. We also believe that drawing a tangible line between protocols that "do" and "do not" have limited access to their API is ill-advised due to the relative nature of this phenomenon.

### Leave the Language in Its Existing State

The current semantics regarding existential types prevent language users, especially library authors, from inheriting useful protocols due to the high cost of maintaining a type erasure construct. Namely, the high maintenance cost is a result of type erasure containers constituting hard-to-understand boilerplate code that entails thorough testing and a significant effort when expanding the protocol at hand. Furthermore, regular language users are often confused by the current restriction, and often lack the expertise or resources required for creating correct type-erasure contructs. 

> 

Reviewer 2: Since the debate in both threads was on the approach to be taken rather than the removal of the restriction, I think we are safe to leave the "do nothing" part out.

Author: I agree it's unnecessary, since it's, also, quite similar to Motivation.

Though, if we *were* going to introduce a new syntax for existentials, we think it'd be much less confusing if we took the potentially source-breaking path and did so uniformly, deprecating the existing syntax after a late-enough language version, than to have yet another attribute and two syntaxes where one only works some of the time. We also believe that drawing a tangible line between protocols that "do" and "do not" have limited access to their API is ill-advised due to the relative nature of this phenomenon.

### Leave the Language in Its Existing State

The current semantics regarding existential types prevent language users, especially library authors, from inheriting useful protocols due to the high cost of maintaining a type erasure construct. Namely, the high maintenance cost is a result of type erasure containers constituting hard-to-understand boilerplate code that entails thorough testing and a significant effort when expanding the protocol at hand. Furthermore, regular language users are often confused by the current restriction, and often lack the expertise or resources required for creating correct type-erasure contructs. 

> ## Future Directions

Author: Do you think that we should add a future direction for opening an existential, and then wrapping it into a type-erasure container? For instance, `init(_ box: Hashable)` could be added to `AnyHashable`. I'm not sure, though, if this addition could be briefly stated in an existing section, or if we'd have to create a new one.

Reviewer 2: There's a bullet point for "automatically opening existentials when passed as generic arguments" at the bottom. That would allow the generic initializer of `AnyHashable` to accept a `Hashable` value.

Author: That would require some implementation work; at the same time, users will be left unable to initialize standard-library-provided type erasers with their language-provided protocol counterparts. I'm not sure if this feature should be part of the proposal, because I think it could create a major usability issue, due to the lack of a feature that can be easily added to the standard library. 

Sorry, if I've missed some aspect of the proposed feature that already enables this behavior.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, the part about "automatically opening existential values" is a future direction (it was also mentioned as such a couple of times in the forums); we are not proposing or implementing it now.

> users will be left unable to initialize standard-library-provided type erasers with their language-provided protocol counterparts.

In case this is still relevant — why is that? Self-conformance *does* allow you to initialize an `AnyProtocol` wrapper with a `Protocol` value, among other stuff.

Author: I wasn't very clear. 

I'm arguing that implementing "self-conforming" existential types would require some implementation work, which is — obviously — not in scope for this proposal.

Yet, the current proposal (without self-conformance) creates serious usability issues — provided that I haven't missed anything — since users will be unable to write something like `AnyHashable(1 as Hashable)`.

What I propose we do, is include:

```swift
extension AnyHashable {
  public init(_ box: Hashable) {
    self = _openExistential(box, do: { unboxed in
      AnyHashable(unboxed)
    })
  }
}
```

Similarly, we could provide such an initializer for `AnyCollection` and any other type-erasing, standard-library wrappers.

Reviewer 2: I see. But `AnyCollection` is not really an option, because we need to somehow represent the `Element` type once we get the wrapper back. 

I have mixed feelings about a permanent workaround to a temporary issue, given that users can add the workaround themselves if they happen to need a new `Hashable` -> `AnyHashable` conversion in the meantime. You are totally welcome to add it as a future direction though.

Author: > I see. But AnyCollection is not really an option, because we need to somehow represent the Element type once we get the wrapper back.

Right. This, then, leaves us just with `AnyHashable`.

> I have mixed feelings about a permanent workaround to a temporary issue, given that users can add the workaround themselves if they happen to need a new Hashable -> AnyHashable conversion in the meantime. You are totally welcome to add it as a future direction though.

I understand your concern. I think whether a workaround will be implemented depends on the timing of the follow-up proposal for automatically opening existentials.

How about the following for a future direction bullet: 

> Add an `init(_ box: Hashable)` initializer to `AnyHashable` to alleviate confusion and aid in usability. This initializer should be treated as a workaround, and removed once automatic opening of existential types becomes available.

Reviewer 2: Sounds fine, but

> ...and removed once automatic opening of existential types becomes available.

this would break the ABI (we cannot remove something `public` once added).

Author: Yeah, I meant "deprecated". Then, after a major version of being deprecated, it could be removed — if that's an option. That, of course, entails that `init(_ box: Hashable)` be marked `@_disfavoredOverload`, in addition to deprecated.

Is this okay?
> Add an `init(_ box: Hashable)` initializer to `AnyHashable` to alleviate confusion and aid in usability. This initializer should be treated as a workaround, and **_deprecated_** once automatic opening of existential types becomes available.

Reviewer 2: * should -> would
* once -> if/when

LGTM.

Author: I just changed `if/when ... becomes available` to `should ... become available`.

# Unlock Existentials with Fixed Associated Types

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-unlock-existential-types-for-all-protocols.md)
* Authors: [Anthony Latsis](https://github.com/AnthonyLatsis), [Filip Sakel](https://github.com/filip-sakel), [Suyash Srijan](https://github.com/theblixguy)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Awaiting Review**
* Implementation: [apple/swift#33767](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/33767)

## Introduction

> Swift currently offers the ability for protocols that meet certain criteria to be used as types. Trying to use an unsupported protocol as a type yields the error: [the protocol] can only be used as a generic constraint because it has 'Self' or associated type requirements. This proposal aims to relax this artificial constraint imposed on such protocols.

Author: > yields the following error:

I think that adding "following" is redundant; that's the function of the colon. If you think, though, that "following" makes this significantly clearer, then go ahead and change it, I don't have any strong opinions about it either.

> protocols with requirements meeting certain criteria

That's much clearer, thank you!

> Perhaps we should be a tad more specific and mention that – instead of the protocol itself – the error will now affect the ability to invoke protocol members in accordance with the criteria.

You're right, that _would_ be more accurate. 

Do you think the following looks better?

> Swift currently offers the ability for protocols with requirement meeting certain criteria to be used as types. Trying to use an unsupported protocol as a type yields the error: [the protocol] can only be used as a generic constraint because it has 'Self' or associated type requirements. This proposal aims to relax this artificial constraint, and instead constraint the availability of protocol members.

## Motivation

> Existential types are types synthesized by the compiler that can wrap any value of a type which conforms to a given _protocol_, _class_, or _composition of the above_. They are an incredibly useful feature in Swift for specific use cases that involve dynamicity. Thus, by being able to wrap different types that conform to a specified protocol, users and, more often, library authors can alleviate a lot of boilerplate code. That is, in certain use cases creating a custom existential type can be quite a daunting task due to its complexity; not to mention, that it introduces a lot of difficult-to-understand and hard-to-maintain code.

Author: > I think omitting some of the sentence connectors makes for a more streamline reading experience.

Okay, I'll remove them.

> Did you mean type erasure?

Yeah, but I think the notion of compiler-generated and user-written existentials is easy to grasp.; not to mention that, at least in my opinion, it draws a simple distinction between the two. However, if you think that it will confuse the reader then I don't mind changing it to "type erasure" instead.

> Another con would be additional API/ABI surface and ensuing resilience limitations.

Great point! I'll add it to the proposal.

> Existential types are types synthesized by the compiler that can wrap any value of a type which conforms to a given _protocol_, _class_, or _composition of the above_. They are an incredibly useful feature in Swift for specific use cases that involve dynamicity. Thus, by being able to wrap different types that conform to a specified protocol, users and, more often, library authors can alleviate a lot of boilerplate code. That is, in certain use cases creating a custom existential type can be quite a daunting task due to its complexity; not to mention, that it introduces a lot of difficult-to-understand and hard-to-maintain code.

Author: > In Swift, an existential type for a given protocol or protocol composition is a distinct type that can wrap a value of any conforming type.

That's really good!

> The current coincidence of existential types and protocols at the surface level is what allows us to use a protocol as if it were an existential type.

I don't think coincidence it the right word here.

I think that just using the first part would be much better:

> **In Swift, an existential type for a given protocol or protocol composition is a distinct type that can wrap a value of any conforming type.** Such types are an incredibly useful...

> Existential types are types synthesized by the compiler that can wrap any value of a type which conforms to a given _protocol_, _class_, or _composition of the above_. They are an incredibly useful feature in Swift for specific use cases that involve dynamicity. Thus, by being able to wrap different types that conform to a specified protocol, users and, more often, library authors can alleviate a lot of boilerplate code. That is, in certain use cases creating a custom existential type can be quite a daunting task due to its complexity; not to mention, that it introduces a lot of difficult-to-understand and hard-to-maintain code.

Reviewer 2: The purpose of the second sentence is to clarify that there is no such thing in the language (including the compiler), and the definition is purely conceptual and simplified. Existential types really do match up with protocol-like types right now. Perhaps we can achieve this by replacing "is" with "in simple terms may be defined as" and start the second one with "Being able to use a protocol as a type is incredibly useful...". But I was planning to make some amendments anyway; we can discuss it then in context of the whole document, I reckon.

> Existential types are types synthesized by the compiler that can wrap any value of a type which conforms to a given _protocol_, _class_, or _composition of the above_. They are an incredibly useful feature in Swift for specific use cases that involve dynamicity. Thus, by being able to wrap different types that conform to a specified protocol, users and, more often, library authors can alleviate a lot of boilerplate code. That is, in certain use cases creating a custom existential type can be quite a daunting task due to its complexity; not to mention, that it introduces a lot of difficult-to-understand and hard-to-maintain code.

Author: Okay, for now I've adopted the first part; I agree that we can leave the second part for later.

### Heterogenous Collections

> Such use cases that involve dynamicity can be heterogenous collections. That is, collections that need to take any type conforming to a given set of constraints involve, by their nature, some sort of existential type. For example:

Author: > Boxing/erasure mechanism?

Yes. But is there a formal definition we could link to so as to aid readers unfamiliar with the terminology?

> Such use cases that involve dynamicity can be heterogenous collections. That is, collections that need to take any type conforming to a given set of constraints involve, by their nature, some sort of existential type. For example:

Author: Yeah, but we should probably find a definition, as readers might not know what we mean.

> Such use cases that involve dynamicity can be heterogenous collections. That is, collections that need to take any type conforming to a given set of constraints involve, by their nature, some sort of existential type. For example:

Reviewer 2: The `Any*` wrappers are described as type-erased values in the documentation. I think "type erasure or boxing mechanism like [link]" is guaranteed not to startle the overwhelming majority of Swift users interested in familiarizing themselves with the proposal.

> Such use cases that involve dynamicity can be heterogenous collections. That is, collections that need to take any type conforming to a given set of constraints involve, by their nature, some sort of existential type. For example:

Reviewer 2: Personally, for the sake of the reader, I would leave out any references as a means to convey that one is expected to understand what a heterogeneous collection means at this point. After all, this is a formal document on a considerably more nuanced topic.

## Proposed Solution

We propose to enable synthesis of existential types for all protocols, in spite of their requirements. Thus, compositions which include protocols that could – before this proposal – not be used as types, will along with these protocols get compiler-generated existential types. Thus code similar to the following will become valid.

```swift
protocol Animal : Identifiable where ID == String {

  ...

}

struct Dog : Animal { ... }

struct Cat : Animal { ... }

let myPets: [Animal] = [
  Dog(named: "Alex"),
  Cat(named: "Leo")
] ✅

myPets.first!.name ℹ️
// Output: Alex
```

## Detailed Design

### Availability of Existential Type

Namely, under the new rules, we propose that a compiler-generated existential be offered for:

1. a protocol, no matter its requirements;
2. a protocol-with-protocol composition; and 

> 3. a protocol-with-class composition.

Reviewer 2: A list seems an overkill when we can say "protocols and protocol compositions". `Protocol & Class` are a kind of protocol composition as per [TSPL](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Protocols.html)

Author: Updated to this:

> Namely, under the new rules, we propose that a compiler-generated existential be offered for protocols and protocol compositions no matter their requirements.

```swift

protocol User { 

  associatedtype ID : Hashable 

  var id: ID { get }

  var username: String { get } 

}

struct RegularUser : User { ... }

let regularUser = RegularUser(id: UUID(), username: "i❤️Swift")

let userExistential = regularUser as User

userExistential.username ℹ️
// Output: i❤️Swift

type(of: userExistential.username) ℹ️
// Output: String

type(of: userExistential.id) ℹ️
// Output: Hashable
```

Looking at the above, one will notice that the `id` requirement of `User` is available despite being bound to the associated type `ID`; thus, the compiler exposes the existential type of `Hashable` as `id`'s type – since, the associated type is _unknown_ in the eyes of `userExistential`. Of course, `username` – whose type is known to be `String` – retains its type, as seen in the above example.

## Source compatibility

This is an additive change with _no_ impact on **source compatibility**.

## Effect on ABI stability

This is an additive change with _no_ impact on **ABI stability**.

## Effect on API resilience

> This is an additive change with _no_ impact on **API resilience**.

Reviewer 2: We should mention that adding a defaulted associated type becomes both a binary- and source-compatible change.

Swift-Evolution Pitch Threads: [Thread #1](https://forums.swift.org/t/lifting-the-self-or-associated-type-constraint-on-existentials/18025), [Thread #2](https://forums.swift.org/t/unlock-existential-types-for-all-protocols/40665)

## Motivation

When a protocol is used as a type, that type is also known as an *existential type*. Unlike `some` types, which represent some *specific* type that conforms to the given constraints, and cannot be reassigned to a different conforming type, a value of existential type can contain a value of *any* conforming type dynamically at any point in time. For convenience, we will be using the term "existential" to refer to such values and their protocol or protocol composition types throughout the proposal. We also wish to draw a distinction between an associated type *requirement* (the declaration), and an associated type (aka a dependent member type). For example, `Self.Element` and `Self.SubSequence.Element` are distinct associated types that point to the same associated type requirement.

> ### Heterogenous Collections

Author: I don't mind its removal. I think it was Doug, who I had first seen presenting heterogeneous collections as motivation for type erasure. However, as you said, we don't need to advocate for type erasure itself, but rather extending it. I might have created this section, in large part, due to a lot of comments, on the first pitch thread, touting type-erasure as some sort of last resort for the shortcomings of generics.

Though, if we *were* going to introduce a new syntax for existentials, we think it'd be much less confusing if we took the potentially source-breaking path and did so uniformly, deprecating the existing syntax after a late-enough language version, than to have yet another attribute and two syntaxes where one only works some of the time. We also believe that drawing a tangible line between protocols that "do" and "do not" have limited access to their API is ill-advised due to the relative nature of this phenomenon.

### Leave the Language in Its Existing State

The current semantics regarding existential types prevent language users, especially library authors, from inheriting useful protocols due to the high cost of maintaining a type erasure construct. Namely, the high maintenance cost is a result of type erasure containers constituting hard-to-understand boilerplate code that entails thorough testing and a significant effort when expanding the protocol at hand. Furthermore, regular language users are often confused by the current restriction, and often lack the expertise or resources required for creating correct type-erasure contructs. 

## Future Directions

> ### Deemphasize Existential Types Through Diagnostics and Literature 

Author: Agreed.

As for the second case, such syntax could be made valid in a future proposal, as it is quite unambiguous and could be equivalent to `<NumberGenerator : RandomNumberGenerator>`.

Lastly, the overall documentation could use existential types only when appropriate and note that it's different from generics.

### Simplify the Implementation of Type-Erasing Wrappers

Currently, in the standard library there's a custom existential type for `Hashable`, which is called [`AnyHashable`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/anyhashable). The current implementation of `AnyHashable` is quite complex and unintuitive. However, with the proposed change it could be simplfied and from 306 to 237 lines of code, while having a much simpler mental medal. The important thing to note about `AnyHashable` is that it conforms to the protocol it is an existential of: `Hashable`, which is something that the compiler can't automatically provide. Furthermore, `Equatable` has `Self` requirements in non-covariant positions, which means that such requirements are inaccessible through the existential type. To combat the last limitation, an internal extension to `Equatable` could be added:

```swift

> extension Equatable {

Author: Yes, I think that's a good idea. How about the following?

----

Currently, the standard library offers type-erasing wrappers, such as `AnyHashable`, and `AnyCollection`. Their current implementations suffer from the problems described in [Motivation](#motivation); however, they could be significantly simplified in the future, so as to aid in readability, compiler optimizations, and all other hurdles of the current approach.

> extension Equatable {

Reviewer 2: FYI: I went ahead and altered it to match the more direct style of the other bullets (I should have done this in a commit suggestion, sorry).

> extension Equatable {

Author: It's OK, it turned out pretty good!

## Motivation

In Swift, an *existential type* for a given *protocol type* or *protocol composition type* is a formally distinct type that has an equivalent spelling and can hold a value of any conforming type, only exposing the interface(s) of the specified protocol(s) (and superclass). The ability to represent an instance of any conforming type enables users and, more importantly, library authors to save on API surface and the considerable amount of boilerplate and difficult-to-maintain code often entailed in the design of ergonomic and exhaustive type-erased wrappers that stand in for a particular existential type. Likewise, existential types can prove incredibly useful in specific use cases that involve dynamicity.

### Heterogenous Collections

Heterogeneous collections inherently involve some sort of dynamicity. Consider this improvised `User` protocol:

```swift
protocol User { 
  associatedtype ID : Hashable 

  var id: ID { get }

  var username: String { get }
} 
```

So, now we want to make business users and regular users that use different types of `ID`s:

```swift
struct BussinessUser : User {

>   struct ID : Hashable {

Author: Did you mean to name `ID` `BusinessID` or did you forget to change the type name in the following declarations?

Reviewer 2: I forgot to update the rest, thanks (it must be `ID` in both cases if we are to conform to `User`).

## Motivation

> In Swift, an *existential type* for a given *protocol type* or *protocol composition type* is a formally distinct type that has an equivalent spelling and can hold a value of any conforming type, exposing just the interface(s) of the specified protocol(s) (and superclass). An *existential value* is therefore a value of an existential type. The ability to represent an instance of any conforming type enables users and, more importantly, library authors to save on API surface and the considerable amount of boilerplate and difficult-to-maintain code often entailed in the design of ergonomic and exhaustive type-erased wrappers that stand in for a particular existential type. Likewise, existential types can prove incredibly useful in specific use cases that involve dynamicity.

Reviewer 2: This was not a typo –– I cannot speak to whether using an article is correct or not, but have never come across this particular construct in literature. Have a look at the intro in [this](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_type_and_reference_type) wiki page.
```suggestion
In Swift, an *existential type* for a given *protocol type* or *protocol composition type* is a formally distinct type that has an equivalent spelling and can hold a value of any conforming type, exposing just the interface(s) of the specified protocol(s) (and superclass). An *existential value* is therefore a value of existential type. The ability to represent an instance of any conforming type enables users and, more importantly, library authors to save on API surface and the considerable amount of boilerplate and difficult-to-maintain code often entailed in the design of ergonomic and exhaustive type-erased wrappers that stand in for a particular existential type. Likewise, existential types can prove incredibly useful in specific use cases that involve dynamicity.
```

Author: I see. I'm okay with "value of existential type", but I'm wondering if "bound to an existential type" would be more in-line with Swift's terminology. I say that because –– at least I –– mostly say "value of type Int" or "value of existential type P". Here, although correctly used, it seems slightly odd to me as it refers to an abstract existential type. 

If you don't like "bound to" go ahead and commit your suggestion.

Reviewer 2: > it refers to an abstract existential type

That is why this sentence follows the definition for an existential type. It isn't that I don't like the word "bound" -- I haven't seen it used between types and values. In Swift, "bound" is usually used to describe relations between type parameters and other types (memory and types as well, in the stdlib [Pointer](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/unsafepointer/2430863-withmemoryrebound) APIs). Does "some existential type" feel a compromise to you?

Removing the type-level restriction would mean that adding defaulted requirements to a protocol is always both a binary- and source-compatible change, since it couldn't interfere with existing uses of the protocol.

### Type-erasing Wrappers

For convenience, libraries are often bound to vend custom type-erasing wrappers for commonly used protocols. Since the wrapper must evolve in sync with the protocol, this comes at the expense of resilience, code size and valuable time required to design, document, and maintain these ergonomic interfaces. While removing the restriction doesn't define away the need for manual containers like [`AnySequence`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/anysequence) and [`AnyHashable`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/anyhashable), it allows for them to be written in a way that's simpler, easier for the compiler to optimize, and ABI-compatible with future generalized existentials, by wrapping the unconstrained existential type instead of falling back on `Any` or boxing a value in a subclass or closure, and using private protocol extensions to wrap requirements that cannot be directly accessed on the existential:

```swift

> protocol Foo {

Author: I think we should avoid 'Foo' and 'Bar', because –– as Holly informed me during the writing of SE-293 –– it is actually an [offensive term](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foobar). Besides, I think we can find better examples with names and concepts that one is more likely to encounter in a real codebase. 

I think a guide for intuitive code examples is the [structured concurrency proposal's](https://github.com/DougGregor/swift-evolution/blob/eb149799aac93b3fb84a97adb2bb3db47179a21b/proposals/nnnn-structured-concurrency.md) dinner preparation examples.

Reviewer 2: I agree we could (and I am going to) try harder on some examples, but I have mixed feelings on how reasonable that is for this particular one that shows a *general* approach to wrappers, or whether it is worth the time for some other rather subtle ones I would like to introduce in the "Detailed Design" section to cover the edge cases. These would most likely end up being an inseparable part of some large abstract interface if used in the wild.

Author: I think that an overarching set of protocols, compositions, or use cases in general, used consistently across the proposal could help in both consistency and comprehensibility. So in the case of Detailed Design, we could provide descriptions and then some notable examples to help tie the thoroughly-discussed behavior together. 

Of course, general examples are inherent in such an abstract feature –– which is not so much the case for the slightly more specific structured concurrency proposal. Structured concurrency is, of course, still an abstract concept; yet, the proposal authors did a great job of concentrating the concept into examples that showcase the its connection to a real-life task (cooking dinner). 

Likewise, property wrappers, through review comments, were identified to belong to some categories, such as utility, proxy, domain-bound (or something to that effect); based on these categories, we settled on some wrappers that were used throughout the text, which I think helps with coherence.

For this proposal, I think the theme is dynamism. Existential types can take the place of generics I think we should focus on the "correct" use cases. The reason why I initially included `AnyView` is because every user of SwiftUI will have probably experienced the live previews as well. These is a great example of how an existential type acts as a bridge between the strictly-typed world of SwiftUI and the dynamic environment of Xcode previews.

### Existential Type Synthesis for Library Authors

> For convenience, libraries are often bound to vend custom type-erased wrappers for commonly-used protocols when their existential counterpart is not supported. This comes at the expense of code size, resilience, and valuable time required to design, document, and maintain such code, more so if the target protocol is not owned by the library. For instance, [SwiftUI](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui) heavily relies on the ubiquitous [`View`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/view) protocol with a public interface approximating the following:

Author: `more so if the target protocol is not owned by the library`

I'm not sure if "owned" is the right word. Do you think that "is not declared in" would work better?

}
```

> Evidently, an associated type or other unfortunate requirements (such as `bar`) cannot speak for the rest of the interface. Some protocols still have a useful subset of functionality that either doesn't rely on `Self` and associated types, or that relies on them in a way compatible with existential types.

Reviewer 2: * "requirement" here relates to both "other" and  "associated type", since we want to distinguish an associated type requirement from an associated type. So the singular form was deliberate. We should either use plural on "associated type" as well, or keep both in singular form.
* If you want to use start both clauses with "that", you should place the currently shared "that" *after* "either" (hopefully makes sense).

```suggestion
Evidently, an associated type or other unfortunate requirement (such as `bar`) cannot speak for the rest of the interface. Some protocols still have a useful subset of functionality that either doesn't rely on `Self` and associated types, or relies on them in a way compatible with existential types.
```

Author: Oh, I see; find a bit confusing, though. How about:

Also some nits on the text. I'm not sure if I wrote some of these or if you did, but reading the text again I think some parts need to be more specific. 

1. Why are requirements such as `bar` characterized as unfortunate. Should we elaborate on this?
2. How –– specifically –– can a protocol be "compatible with existential values/types"?

----
Evidently, an associated type requirement or another unfortunate requirement (such as `bar`) cannot speak for the rest of the interface. Some protocols still have a useful subset of functionality that does not rely on `Self` and associated types, or is compatible with existential values.

Reviewer 2: > 1. Why are requirements such as bar characterized as unfortunate. Should we elaborate on this?

This is the subject of the previous paragraph.

> 2. How –– specifically –– can a protocol be "compatible with existential values/types"?

Not a protocol though, its functionality. "Compatible" is meant to emphasize that a requirement may depend on `Self` in a way that does not contradict the criteria (and could have been used on an existential value were the protocol not under the restriction).

> The case of an associated type requirement that is known to have a predefined implementation reveals another downside of the status quo:

Reviewer 2: I do not have strong feelings about this, but "of" reads as directed towards the existence of status quo, while "to" –  as directed towards some property of the status quo.

Author: Reverted.

}
```

> Unfortunately, `Animal` is still "assumed" to have an associated type requirement, which is solely responsible for restraining the existential.

Reviewer 2: * Why use "unfortunately" where we can afford to state why something is unfortunate?
* "assumed as having" means "treated as having", "assumed to have" is a conjecture.

Author: `"assumed as having" means "treated as having", "assumed to have" is a conjecture.`

Sorry for misinterpreting that.

`Why use a sighing "unfortunately" where we can afford to state why something is unfortunate?`

I don't mind using "Contrary to the intent" so long as we specify whose intent –– otherwise it is, in my opinion, better to use a well-known, widely used connector. I assume you mean: Contrary to the author's intent.

  ```suggestion
Contrary to the author's intent, `Animal` is still assumed as having an associated type requirement, which is solely responsible for restraining the existential.
```

Reviewer 2: Agreed. Let us use "user" or "developer" though, otherwise it might seem as if we are referring to the authors of the proposal. Feel free to edit and commit the suggestion.

> The current semantic inconsistency also discourages authors from refining their existing protocols with other, useful ones in fear of losing existential qualification.

Author: `Did this part feel wordy to you?`

Yes, I thought that "One more counterproductive aspect to the semantic inconsistency is how" could be shortened to a simple sentence that just shows that it adds information (otherwise it is a bit hard for me to follow). Also, "could be lead" complicates the sentence due to the hypothetical speech.

Does the following make more sense?

----

The current semantic inconsistency also discourages authors from refining other, useful protocols with their existing ones in fear that they will lose existential qualification.

### Library Evolution

Removing the type-level restriction would mean that adding defaulted requirements to a protocol is always both a binary- and source-compatible change, since it would not interfere with existing uses of the protocol.

### Type-erasing Wrappers

> For convenience, libraries often vend custom type-erasing wrappers for commonly used protocols. Since the wrapper must evolve in parallel to the protocol, resilience, code size and valuable time required to design, document, and maintain these ergonomic interfaces are all sacrificed. While removing the restriction doesn't define away the need for manual containers, like [`AnySequence`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/anysequence) and [`AnyHashable`](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/anyhashable), it does allow writing them in a simpler, more easily optmizable, and ABI-compatible way. This is achieved by wrapping the unconstrained existential type instead of falling back on `Any` or boxing a value in a subclass or closure, and using private protocol extensions to wrap requirements that cannot be directly accessed on the existential:

Reviewer 2: Why did we choose to loose information on optimizations and ABI compatibility here?

Author: Sorry for the optimizations part; is this okay: more easily optimizable __by the compiler__? (I also made a typo optmizable -> optimizable 😅)

As for ABI compatibility I might have misunderstood what you are saying. Could you elaborate?

Reviewer 2: > As for ABI compatibility I might have misunderstood what you are saying. Could you elaborate?

"ABI compatible" by itself has an opaque meaning. It is important to mention that we are talking about binary compatibility with future generalized existentials -- they would allow us to further improve the implementation of some wrappers without breaking the ABI. 

P.S. I borrowed this sentence from Joe's [reply](https://forums.swift.org/t/lifting-the-self-or-associated-type-constraint-on-existentials/18025/26).

Author: Perhaps we should include the "explanation" from Joe's reply: "by wrapping the unconstrained existential type instead of boxing a value in a subclass or closure". Also, I think we should either directly quote Joe, or paraphrase so that we don't plagiarize.

Also, generalized existential types are not that well defined, should we include the link to the [relevant section](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/GenericsManifesto.md#generalized-existentials) of the generics manifesto.

Reviewer 2: > Perhaps we should include the "explanation" from Joe's reply: "by wrapping the unconstrained existential type instead of boxing a value in a subclass or closure".

It is already there. I was talking about the deletion of "and ABI-compatible *with future generalized existentials*".

> Also, I think we should either directly quote Joe, or paraphrase so that we don't plagiarize.

Joe can be a co-author, the original pitch was *his* undertaking after all.

> Also, generalized existential types are not that well defined, should we include the link to the relevant section of the generics manifesto.

Cool

Author: > It is already there. I was talking about the deletion of "and ABI-compatible with future generalized existentials".
Whoops.

> Joe can be a co-author, the original pitch was his undertaking after all.
Yeah, of course. (Great, I saw that we added him as an author too!)

```
Notice how the associated type that would preclude a call to `method` on a value of type `Q` is actually `A`, not `B` as the result type may suggest, due to the same-type constraint on the protocol.

> #### Non-Conformable Existentials

Reviewer 2: By contrast with "type-erasing", "non" is merely a prefix, not a standalone word, so the second element was correct to be in lower case.
